Scholars in the Social Sciences and Humanities
make use of monographs to communicate research data, debate ideas, and shift paradigms.
Rooted in the print format,
the monograph is now evolving toward Open Access,
becoming an enriched digital document
which can be discovered, cited, linked
and annotated in a multi-modal environment.
But the transition to Open Access
comes with conceptual,
economical
and technical barriers,
from reading habits and quality assurance,
to licensing and data storage demands.
To overcome these obstacles,
the European Union funded the HIRMEOS project.
HIRMEOS integrates five existing digital platforms
on which more than 10.000 open access,
peer reviewed monographs are published,
in more than 10 languages.
HIRMEOS adds new services to ensure better discoverability and quality certification of books,
and provides tools for named entity recognition,
annotation and metrics to enhance their usage.
These implementations prepare the way for OPERAS:
a wider research infrastructure aimed at developing
more inclusive open scholarly communication
and exploring emerging publishing models.
First, HIRMEOS sets up a common framework,
integrating standard identifiers and a shared certification service.
Three new data sources identify authors, documents and funding institutions.
For researchers,
this means it is easier to cite books and verify sources,
as well as to cross link documents and find scholarly contributions.
By adopting a system of peer review certification,
HIRMEOS aims at giving scholars and libraries confidence
in the quality of the monographs they acquire and read.
Three advanced services allow for new forms of interaction with the documents.
The first tool recognizes named entities types
person name,
location,
organization in the text
and identifies them correctly;
the second tool enables readers to directly add annotations to monographs,
pioneering new forms of commentary and peer review,
and transforming the monograph into a place of open discussion between authors and readers.
Thirdly,
Usage Metrics and Altmetrics describe the reach and impact of a monograph,
measuring downloads,
views and citations in scholarly literature and social media.
We intend the Open Access Digital Monograph
as a medium that completes and enhances the printed document,
uncovering new methodologies and research fields in the Social Sciences and Humanities.
Follow Hirmeos and Operas’ roadmap at hirmeos.eu and operas-eu.org
and join the discussion to develop better ways of acquiring
and disseminating open knowledge.